posts/setting-up-mdx-blog.mdx, before:

---
title: "Setting up MDX Blog"
date: "2021-08-24"
time_to_read: "3min"
author: Mohammad Afroz
# image: "url"
categories: ["Web"]
description: Setting up a blog using next.js with MDX capabilities.
---

Hey there!

Just summarizing the techstack I used to built this site. It's a long list!

Let's start!

### What is JSX?
HTML like Templating Language but with Javascript powers [introduced](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html) by React team.
### What is MDX?
MDX is an authorable format that lets you seamlessly write JSX in your Markdown documents. You can import components, such as interactive charts or alerts, and embed them within your content. This makes writing long-form content with components a blast. 🚀 check [docs](https://mdxjs.com/mdx/) for info.
### What are Webpack Loaders?
Loaders work at the individual file level during or before the **bundle** is generated.Check Webpack [loaders](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/loaders/#loader-features) & [configuration](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/loaders/#configuration).
### What are Webpack Plugins?
Plugins work at **bundle** or **chunk** level and usually work at the end of the bundle generation process. Plugins can also modify how the bundles themselves are created. Plugins have more powerful control than loaders.

Here's an simplified Stackoverflow [answer](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37452402/webpack-loaders-vs-plugins-whats-the-difference).


## Tech stack:

- **Typescript**
- **[Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs)** (which is based on React, provides dynamic page routes, SSG, SSR, Font/Image/Script Optimizations, flexible config management, etc)
- **Styled Components** (CSS-in-JS library)
- **gray-matter** to extract frontMatter from mdx files.

  - `lib/mdx-data-loader.js`

    ```js-ln
    const matter = require("gray-matter");
    const stringifyObject = require("stringify-object");

    module.exports = async function (src) {
      const callback = this.async();
      const { content, data } = matter(src);

      // exporting frontMatter
      const code = `export const frontMatter = ${stringifyObject(data)}

    ${content}`;

      return callback(null, code);
    };
    ```

- **@mdx-js/loader** is a Webpack loader for MDX. Remember, Loaders are evaluated/executed from right to left (or from bottom to top), Here's the setup.

  - `next.config.js`

    ```js
    module.exports = {
      // ...other config

      webpack: (config, { webpack, defaultLoaders }) => {
        config.resolve.alias["@"] = path.resolve(__dirname, ".");
        config.module.rules.push({
          test: /\.mdx?$/,
          use: [
            defaultLoaders.babel, // includes next.js default babel conf/loaders
            "@mdx-js/loader", // turn mdx in to Javascript and map js-components to HTML elements based on Markdown syntax
            path.join(__dirname, "./lib/mdx-data-loader"), // extract frontMatter from mdx
          ],
        });
        return config;
      },
    };
    ```

  - Now we can render MDX in `article/[...id].js`

    ```js
    export default App =({resourceId}) => {

      const MDX = dynamic(() => import(`../../posts/${resourceId}.mdx`)

      return (<MDX />)
    }

    ```
- **babel-plugin-import-glob-array** babel plugin to enable importing modules using a [glob pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)).

  - `.babelrc`

    ```js
    {
      "presets": ["next/babel"],
      "plugins": [
        "import-glob-array",
        ["styled-components", { "ssr": true }]]
        // ...other plugins
    }
    ```
  - I used it to generate list of articles and their frontMatter details like 👇.

    ```js
    import {
      frontMatter as postFms, // using frontMatter exported by mdx-data-loader
      _importMeta as postMetadatas,
    } from "../posts/*.mdx";

    ```
- **next-offline** for offline caching capabilities.
- **prism-react-renderer** for code blocks.
- Followed this article on [How to setup DarkMode for Gatsby](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/react/dark-mode/) for dark mode setup.

  - The idea is to inject theme changing js code into html at build time.
  - Injected Javascript code fetches preferred/persisted colorMode and applies styles accordingly.

Here's full [sourcecode](https://github.com/zkindest/zkindest.github.io).

That's it! Let me know what you think in the comments below.

Thank you!

Commit message:

imrove seo on projects,about | fix typo's

posts/setting-up-mdx-blog.mdx, after:

---
title: "Setting up MDX Blog"
date: "2021-08-24"
time_to_read: "3min"
author: Mohammad Afroz
# image: "url"
categories: ["Web"]
description: Setting up a blog using next.js with MDX capabilities.
---

Hey there!

Just summarizing the techstack I used to built this site. It's a long list!

Let's start!

### What is JSX?
HTML like Templating Language but with Javascript powers [introduced](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html) by React team.
### What is MDX?
MDX is an authorable format that lets you seamlessly write JSX in your Markdown documents. You can import components, such as interactive charts or alerts, and embed them within your content. This makes writing long-form content with components a blast. 🚀 check [docs](https://mdxjs.com/mdx/) for more info.
### What are Webpack Loaders?
Loaders work at the individual file level during or before the **bundle** is generated.Check Webpack [loaders](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/loaders/#loader-features) & how to [configure](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/loaders/#configuration).
### What are Webpack Plugins?
Plugins work at **bundle** or **chunk** level and usually work at the end of the bundle generation process. Plugins can also modify how the bundles themselves are created. Plugins have more powerful control than loaders. Check Webpack [loaders](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/plugins/) & how to [configure](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/plugins/#configuration).

Here's a Stackoverflow [thread](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37452402/webpack-loaders-vs-plugins-whats-the-difference) to know more about loaders vs plugins.


## Tech stack:

- **Typescript**
- **[Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs)** (which is based on React, provides dynamic page routes, SSG, SSR, Font/Image/Script Optimizations, flexible config management, etc)
- **Styled Components** (CSS-in-JS library)
- **gray-matter** to extract frontMatter from mdx files.

  - `lib/mdx-data-loader.js`

    ```js-ln
    const matter = require("gray-matter");
    const stringifyObject = require("stringify-object");

    module.exports = async function (src) {
      const callback = this.async();
      const { content, data } = matter(src);

      // exporting frontMatter
      const code = `export const frontMatter = ${stringifyObject(data)}

    ${content}`;

      return callback(null, code);
    };
    ```

- **@mdx-js/loader** is a Webpack loader for MDX. Remember, Loaders are evaluated/executed from right to left (or from bottom to top), Here's the setup.

  - `next.config.js`

    ```js
    module.exports = {
      // ...other config

      webpack: (config, { webpack, defaultLoaders }) => {
        config.resolve.alias["@"] = path.resolve(__dirname, ".");
        config.module.rules.push({
          test: /\.mdx?$/,
          use: [
            defaultLoaders.babel, // includes next.js default babel conf/loaders
            "@mdx-js/loader", // turn mdx in to Javascript and map js-components to HTML elements based on Markdown syntax
            path.join(__dirname, "./lib/mdx-data-loader"), // extract frontMatter from mdx
          ],
        });
        return config;
      },
    };
    ```

  - Now we can render MDX in `article/[...id].js`

    ```js
    export default App =({resourceId}) => {

      const MDX = dynamic(() => import(`../../posts/${resourceId}.mdx`)

      return (<MDX />)
    }

    ```
- **babel-plugin-import-glob-array** babel plugin to enable importing modules using a [glob pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)).

  - `.babelrc`

    ```js
    {
      "presets": ["next/babel"],
      "plugins": [
        "import-glob-array",
        ["styled-components", { "ssr": true }]]
        // ...other plugins
    }
    ```
  - I used it to generate list of articles and their frontMatter details like 👇.

    ```js
    import {
      frontMatter as postFms, // using frontMatter exported by mdx-data-loader
      _importMeta as postMetadatas,
    } from "../posts/*.mdx";

    ```
- **next-offline** for offline caching capabilities.
- **prism-react-renderer** for code blocks.
- Followed this article on [How to setup DarkMode for Gatsby](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/react/dark-mode/) for dark mode setup.

  - The idea is to inject theme changing js code into html at build time.
  - Injected Javascript code fetches preferred/persisted colorMode and applies styles accordingly.

Here's full [sourcecode](https://github.com/zkindest/zkindest.github.io).

That's it...

Thank you!
